# Chapter 1. Why I Wrote This Book

The great thing about software patterns is that they convey
many useful design ideas. It follows, therefore, that if you learn
a bunch of these patterns, you'll be a pretty good software
designer, right? I considered myself just that once I'd learned
and used dozens of patterns. They helped me develop flexible
frameworks and build robust and extensible software systems.
After a couple of years, however, I discovered that my
knowledge of patterns and the way I used them frequently led
me to over-engineer my work.

Once my design skills had improved, I found myself using
patterns in a different way: I began refactoring to, towards, and
away from patterns, instead of using them for up-front design
or introducing them too early into my code. My new way of
working with patterns emerged from my adoption of extreme
programming (XP) design practices, which helped me avoid
both over-and under-engineering.

## Over-Engineering

When you make your code more flexible or sophisticated than
it needs to be, you over-engineer it. Some programmers do this
because they believe they know their system's future
requirements. They reason that it's best to make a design more
flexible or sophisticated today, so it can accommodate the
needs of tomorrow. That sounds reasonable—if you happen to
be psychic.

If your predictions are wrong, you waste precious time and
money. It's not uncommon to spend days or weeks fine-tuning
an overly flexible or unnecessarily sophisticated software
design, leaving you with less time to add new behavior or
remove defects.

What typically happens with code you produce in anticipation
of needs that never materialize? It never gets removed. This
happens either because it's inconvenient to remove the code or
because you expect that one day the code might be needed.
Regardless of the reason, as overly flexible or unnecessarily
sophisticated code accumulates, you and the rest of the
programmers on your team, especially new ones, must operate
within a code base that's bigger and more complicated than it
needs to be.

To compensate, folks decide to work in discrete areas of a
system. This seems to make their jobs easier, yet it has the
unpleasant side effect of generating lots of duplicate code
because everyone works in his or her own comfortable area of
the system, rarely seeking elsewhere for code that already
does what he or she needs.Over-engineered code affects productivity because when
programmers inherit an over-engineered design, they must
spend time learning the nuances of that design before they can
comfortably extend or maintain it.

Over-engineering tends to happen quietly; many architects and
programmers aren't even aware they are doing it. And while
their organizations may discern a decline in team productivity,
few know that over-engineering plays a role in the problem.

Perhaps the main reason programmers over-engineer is that
they don't want to get stuck with a bad design. A bad design
can weave its way so deeply into code that improving it
becomes an enormous challenge. I've been there, and that's
why up-front design with patterns appealed to me so much.

## The Patterns Panacea

When I first began learning patterns, they represented a
flexible, sophisticated, even elegant way to do object-oriented
design that I very much wanted to master. After thoroughly
studying numerous patterns and pattern languages, I used
them to improve systems I had already built and to formulate
designs for systems I was about to build. Because the results
of these efforts were promising, I felt sure I was on the right
path.

But over time, the power of patterns led me to lose sight of
simpler ways to write code. After learning that there were two
or three different ways to do a calculation, I'd immediately race
towards implementing the Strategy pattern, when, in fact, a
simple conditional expression would have been easier and
faster to program—a perfectly sufficient solution.

On one occasion, my preoccupation with patterns became
quite apparent. I was pair-programming, and my partner and I
had written a class that implemented Java's TReeModel
interface in order to display a graph of Spec objects in a tree
widget. Our code worked, but the tree widget was displaying
each Spec object by calling its toString() method, which
didn't return the Spec information we wanted. We couldn't
change Spec's toString() method because other parts of
the system relied on its contents. So we reflected on how to
proceed. As was my habit, I considered which patterns could
help. The Decorator pattern came to mind, and I suggested
that we use it to wrap Spec with an object that could override
the toString() method. My partner's response to this
suggestion surprised me. "Using a Decorator here would belike applying a sledgehammer to the problem when a few light
taps with a small hammer would do." His solution was to create
a small class called NodeDisplay, whose constructor took a
Spec instance and whose one public method, toString(),
obtained the correct display information from the Spec
instance. NodeDisplay took no time to program because it
was less than 10 simple lines of code. My Decorator solution
would have involved creating over 50 lines of code, with many
repetitive delegation calls to the Spec instance.

Experiences like this made me aware that I needed to stop
thinking so much about patterns and refocus on writing small,
simple, understandable code. I was at a crossroads: I'd worked
hard to learn patterns to become a better software designer,
but now I needed to relax my reliance on them in order to
become truly better.

## Under-Engineering

Under-engineering is far more common than over-engineering.
We under-engineer when we produce poorly designed
software. This may occur for several reasons.

+ We don't have time, don't make time, or aren't given time
to refactor.
+ We aren't knowledgeable about good software design.
We're expected to quickly add new features to existing
systems.
+ We're made to work on too many projects at once.

Over time, under-engineered software becomes an expensive,
difficult-to-maintain or unmaintainable mess. Brian Foote and
Joseph Yoder, who authored a pattern language called Big Ball
of Mud, describe such software like this:

````
Data structures may be haphazardly constructed, or even
next to non-existent. Everything talks to everything else.
Every shred of important state data may be global. Where
state information is compartmentalized, it may be passed
promiscuously about though Byzantine back channels that
circumvent the system's original structure.
Variable and function names might be uninformative, or
even misleading. Functions themselves may make
extensive use of global variables, as well as long lists of
poorly defined parameters. The functions themselves are
lengthy and convoluted, and perform several unrelated
tasks. Code is duplicated. The flow of control is hard tounderstand, and difficult to follow. The programmer's intent
is next to impossible to discern. The code is simply
unreadable, and borders on indecipherable. The code
exhibits the unmistakable signs of patch after patch at the
hands of multiple maintainers, each of whom barely
understood the consequences of what he or she was
doing. [Foote and Yoder, 661]
````

While systems you've worked on may not be so gruesome, it's
likely you've done some under-engineering. I know I have.
There's simply an overwhelming urge to get code working
quickly, and it's often coupled with powerful forces that impede
our ability to improve the design of our existing code. In some
cases, we consciously don't improve our code because we
know (or think we know) it won't have a long shelf life. Other
times, we're compelled to not improve our code because well-
meaning managers explain that our organization will be more
competitive and successful if we "don't fix what ain't broke."

Continuous under-engineering leads to the "fast, slow, slower"
rhythm of software development, which goes something like
this.

1. You quickly deliver release 1.0 of a system with junky
code.
2. You deliver release 2.0 of the system, and the junky code
slows you down.
3. As you attempt to deliver future releases, you go slower
and slower as the junky code multiplies, until people lose
faith in the system, the programmers, and even the
process that got everyone into this position.
4. Somewhere during or after release 4.0, you realize you
can't win. You begin exploring the option of a total rewrite.

This kind of experience is far too common in our industry. It's
costly and it makes organizations far less competitive than they
could be. Fortunately, there is a better way.

## Test-Driven Development and Continuous Refactoring

Test-driven development [Beck, TDD] and continuous
refactoring, two of the many excellent XP practices, have
dramatically improved the way I build software. I've found that
these two practices have helped me and the organizations I've
worked for spend less time over-engineering and under-
engineering and more time creating high-quality, function-rich
code, produced on time.

Test-driven development (TDD) and continuous refactoring
enable the efficient evolution of working code by turning
programming into a dialogue.

Ask: You ask a question of a system by writing a test.

Respond: You respond to the question by writing code to
pass the test.

Refine: You refine your response by consolidating ideas,
weeding out inessentials, and clarifying ambiguities.

Repeat: You keep the dialogue going by asking the next
question.

This rhythm of programming put my head into a totally new
place. By using TDD, instead of spending lots of time thinking
about a design that would work for every nuance of a system, I
now spend seconds or minutes making a primitive piece of
behavior work correctly before refactoring and evolving it to the
next necessary level of sophistication.

Kent Beck's mantra of TDD and continuous refactoring is "red,
green, refactor." The colors refer to what you see when you
write and run a test in a unit-testing tool (like JUnit). The
process goes like this.

1. Red: You create a test that expresses what you expect
your code to do. The test fails (turns red) because you
haven't created code to make the test pass.

2. Green: You program whatever is expedient to make the
test pass (turn green). You don't pain yourself to come up
with a duplication-free, simple, clear design at this point.
You'll drive towards such a design later, when your test is
passing and you can comfortably experiment with better
designs.

3. Refactor: You improve the design of the code that passed
the test.

Simple as this sounds, TDD and continuous refactoring turn
the world of programming upside down. The inexperienced
programmer may think, "Write a test for code that doesn't
exist? Write code that passes a test yet needs immediate
refactoring? Is this a wasteful, haphazard approach to software
development or what?"

Actually, it's just the opposite. TDD and continuous refactoring
provide a lean, iterative, and disciplined style of programming
that maximizes focus, relaxation, and productivity. "Rapid
unhurriedness" is how Martin Fowler describes it [as quoted in
Beck, TDD], while Ward Cunningham explains that it's more
about continuous analysis and design than it is about testing.

Learning the right rhythm of TDD and continuous refactoring
requires practice. Tony Mobley, a programmer I know,
described this style of development as a paradigm shift as
great, if not greater, than moving from structured programmingto object-oriented programming. However long it takes you to
get used to this style of development, once you do, you'll find
that producing production code any other way feels odd,
uncomfortable, even unprofessional. Many of us who program
using TDD and continuous refactoring find that it helps us:

+ Keep defect counts low
+ Refactor without fear
+ Produce simpler, better code
+ Program without stress

To learn the ins and outs of TDD, study Test-Driven
Development [Beck, TDD] or Test-Driven Development: A
Practical Guide [Astels]. For a taste of what it's like to do TDD,
see the example sections from Replace Implicit Tree with
Composite (178) and Encapsulate Composite with Builder (96).
To learn how to continuously refactor, you'll want to study
Refactoring [F] (particularly the first chapter) as well as the
refactorings in this book.

## Refactoring and Patterns

On various projects, I've observed what and how my
colleagues and I refactor. While we use many of the
refactorings described in Refactoring [F], we also find places
where patterns help us improve our designs. At such times, we
refactor to or towards patterns, being careful not to produce
overly flexible or unnecessarily sophisticated solutions.

When I explored the motivations for applying pattern-directed
refactorings, I found they are identical to the general
motivations for implementing low-level refactorings: to reduce
or remove duplication, to simplify what is complicated, and to
make code better at communicating its intention.

This motivation can easily be missed if you study only a portion
of a design pattern. For example, every pattern in Design
Patterns [DP] includes a section known as the Intent. The
authors of Design Patterns describe the Intent as follows: "A
short statement that answers the following questions: What
does the design pattern do? What is its rationale and intent?
What particular design issues or problem does it address?"
[DP, 6]. Despite this description, the Intent sections for many
design patterns only hint at the main problem the pattern
solves. Instead, more of the focus is put on what the pattern
does. Here are two examples.

**Intent of Template Method**

Define the skeleton of an algorithm in an operation,
deferring some steps to subclasses. Template Method lets
subclasses redefine certain steps of an algorithm without
changing the algorithm's structure. [DP, 325]

**Intent of State**

Allow an object to alter its behavior when its internal state
changes. The object will appear to change its class. [DP,
315]

These Intent descriptions don't say that a Template Method
helps reduce or remove duplicated code in similar methods of
subclasses in a hierarchy or that the State pattern helps
simplify complex conditional state-changing logic. If
programmers study all of the sections of a design pattern,
particularly the Applicability section, they'll learn about the
problems the pattern addresses.

However, when using the Design Patterns book during design,
many programmers, myself included, have read the Intent
section of a pattern to see whether the pattern could provide a
good fit for a given situation. This method of choosing a pattern
doesn't work as well as a method that helps you match a
design problem to the problems addressed by a pattern. Why?
Because patterns exist to solve problems, and learning
whether they really can help in a given situation involves
understanding what problems they help solve.

The refactoring literature tends to focus more on specific
design problems than the patterns literature does. If you study
the first page of a refactoring, you'll see the kind of problem the
refactoring helps solve. The catalog of pattern-directed
refactorings presented in this book, which is a direct
continuation of work started in Refactoring, is intended to help
you see what kinds of specific problems the patterns help
solve.

While this book bridges the gap between patterns and
refactoring, the connection between the two was noted by theauthors of Design Patterns in the conclusion to their great
book:

Our design patterns capture many of the structures that
result from refactoring. . . . Design patterns thus provide
targets for your refactorings. [DP, 354]

Martin Fowler makes a similar observation near the beginning
of Refactoring:

There is a natural relation between patterns and
refactorings. Patterns are where you want to be;
refactorings are ways to get there from somewhere else.
[F, 107]

## Evolutionary Design

Today, after having become quite familiar with patterns, the
"structures that result from refactoring," I know that
understanding good reasons to refactor to or towards a pattern
are more valuable than understanding the end result of a
pattern or the nuances of implementing that end result.

If you'd like to become a better software designer, studying the
evolution of great software designs will be more valuable than
studying the great designs themselves. For it is in the evolution
that the real wisdom lies. The structures that result from the
evolution can help you, but without knowing why they were
evolved into a design, you're more likely to misapply them or
over-engineer with them on your next project.

To date, our software design literature has focused more on
teaching great solutions than on teaching evolutions to great
solutions. We need to change that. As the great poet Goethe
said, "That which thy fathers have bequeathed to thee, earn it
anew if thou wouldst possess it." The refactoring literature is
helping us reacquire a better understanding of good design
solutions by revealing sensible evolutions to those solutions.

If you want to get the most out of patterns, you must do the
same thing: See patterns in the context of refactoring, not just
as reusable elements that exist apart from refactoring. This is
my primary reason for producing a catalog of pattern-directed
refactorings.

By learning to evolve your designs, you can become a better
software designer and reduce the amount of work you over or
under-engineer. TDD and continuous refactoring are the keypractices of evolutionary design. Instill pattern-directed
refactorings into your knowledge of how to refactor and you'll
find yourself even better equipped to evolve great designs.
